I see television cbc news network
streaming wherever you might be right
around the world Prime Minister Justin
Trudeau will deliver his daily address
this hour he might do it a little later
it'll be somewhere between 11:15 and
11:30 Eastern and the reason the time
might change is because he did earlier
today speak virtually on a global stage
taking part in an online pledging
conference to try and raise eleven point
six billion dollars for research into a
corona virus vaccine and or treatments
we're expecting him to expand beyond
Canada's contribution to that it was
eight hundred and fifty million dollars
that he had previously pledged but
talked about at that global conversation
this morning it comes all of this comes
really as five provinces take some big
steps today towards reopening parts of
their economies looks different
depending on where you live of course
Quebec Ontario Manitoba Saskatchewan
Alberta some of those provinces much
more ambitious than others so we'll look
at the specifics over the next few hours
to all of the provinces trying to gauge
whether easing some Kovach 19
restrictions can be done without causing
a spike or surge in new infections all
right let me show you what we are
waiting for if we have that shot Rideau
cottage here we go
a very familiar sight to all of us now
that is where the Prime Minister is
expected to emerge maybe in 15 minutes
maybe 20 minutes I think he thought the
global conference would go on a little
longer so he likely will be here around
his same usual time while we wait I'll
bring in my colleagues Ashley cappella
the host of pet CBC's power and politics
and the CBC's David Cochrane from our
parliamentary Bureau good to see you
both I don't know I mean I know he will
want to talk about the global pledge
this morning and you know it's important
certainly it's also important to note
who was not in attendance at that
conference and that is the United States
but I think there will also be a lot of
questions about provinces reopening
because there are different degrees of
that happening across the country today
fasci yeah and I think rosy it ties in
to a certain degree
you're right I'm sure we'll hear some
more about the money that the prime
minister reiterated today that the
government is putting towards mostly
things like vaccine research as you
mentioned that money had already been
now
being announced but he sort of made it
clear or made it evident again today in
that conversation with other world
leaders I think where that all ties in
though to where most Canadians are
focused at this moment is with the
economy reopening and depending on where
you live that means something different
you know all world leaders underscore
the same point that we have heard over
and over which is that life may not
return or will not return to a full
level of normalcy without a vaccine or
without a solid set of treatments so all
of the sort of global money and
investment being poured into research
it's unprecedented the amount of
research being poured into this vaccine
right now globally but at the end of the
day there are no guarantees that it
turns around vaccine very quickly or any
sooner than expected we're thinking 12
to 18 months best-case scenarios so in
the meantime there is this phased
approach to reopening economies as I
said depending on the province you live
in and that's where I'm really keen to
hear some more from the prime minister
on and I'll tell you why because
yesterday our colleagues at Radio Canada
asked quite a few questions both
directed at him and then also at federal
public health officials like dr. Teresa
Tam about the level of testing that is
necessary in order to be confident that
an economy can reopen and that is I
found I couldn't I could not hear a
straight answer pretty much anywhere we
know that for example federal public
health officials want to go from 23,000
tests a day to 60,000 tests a day
I don't know how long that's going to
take or what the hindrance is in getting
there is it just processing capacity is
it the actual number of tests when do we
expect to get at that point and what is
exactly necessary like what is the level
necessary to open restaurants to open
and I know that's not an easy or quick
answer but I do think at least I'm
hearing from particularly a number of
businesses or even consumers who are
worried about entering those businesses
about like what do what do we need to
know what kind of PPE is there how many
tests need to be done in order to be
confident that these are the right steps
and again there's no guarantee there's
no easy answer to that but I am
interested to hear from both the prime
minister and federal public health
officials about that okay and to that
end there are places like Manitoba for
instance my home province there they're
going pretty
aggressively today towards reopening
things museums libraries some retail
businesses patios at half capacity so
indifferent they'll look different than
they did before but they are moving
towards that there are other places like
Ontario here in Ontario you know the
garden center is open today and that's
about it even though they have had today
our colleague Chris Carter notes 370 new
cases 500 recoveries so more recoveries
than new cases which is definitely a
positive sign David you and I were just
talking about this before other places
where they've tried to reopen and it
doesn't always work yeah and it's
interesting because we're starting to
see politics come back in a big way over
the last week or so everyone sort of set
the differences aside except for a few
squabbles here in in Ottawa but now
we're starting to see some federal
provincial disagreement on things that
the premier of Manitoba Brian Pallister
criticizing the Canada emergency
response benefit and things like the
student aid packages that the government
has rolled out as giving people a
disincentive to work and just before we
came on the air we saw a very sharp
criticism of that from Conservative
leader Andrew Shearer who said that the
Canadian government the Trudeau
government has put a tranquilizer into
the Canadian economy now Kovan 19 may
have done that a lot of people would
argue and these emergency packages were
there to put a financial floor under
people but Shearer is now putting an
aggressive criticism of these aid
packages on the table for a discussion
saying it will impair the recovery and
could hurt the reopening efforts being
led by the provinces it's an interesting
argument to make because this is really
day one of much of the gradual reopening
that are happening and quite frankly we
have absolutely no idea how this is
going to go we don't know if it's going
to lead to resurgence in cases we don't
know if it's gonna be fine and lead to
an even broader reopening of the economy
and these programs have been in place
for less than two months right now so
it's hard to draw very significant
long-term definitive conclusions we did
have a week or so last week of a lot of
people relying on anecdotal data saying
that a lot of these programs we're
stopping people from taking jobs mostly
at the bottom of the economic
latter which maybe should spark a larger
conversation about the salaries were
paying people to take minimum-wage jobs
at a time of a pandemic rather than the
economic dampening effect of income
support programs designed to keep people
at home and stop the spread but it seems
like we're going to embark on a
large-scale political argument on this
certainly with the Conservatives and
some more conservative leading premiers
coming out and attacking the aid
packages that the federal government has
put out there to help Canadians yeah I
would say at the very least it seems
premature to have that conversation when
we don't know how the reopening czar
going to go we don't know if places will
be able to reopen we don't know as Vash
we pointed out if there's enough PPE for
people working in these places we don't
know if anyone's going to show up
because our people really feeling
comfortable leaving their homes right
now so you saw stories out of Georgia
rosy which has been one of the states
aggressively reopening where they expect
two people to come back and some places
got two customers on the weekend so you
can get your PPE you can get your
employees you can get the right to open
up
it doesn't mean anyone's gonna show up
and buy anything yeah and I'm not sure
all the Canadians 7 million Canadians
who are getting the CRB would agree with
that political argument at this time
anyway I'll put you both on hold for one
moment if I can I'll also just make note
of an important Air Canada a bit of news
that came out just before we went on air
as well as having significant losses in
the first quarter the company though has
made a move as of May 15th to do some
pretty dramatic changes to how flights
will start to look and I know that's
something of interest to people it is it
will now be mandatory for pre-flight
temperature checks before you get on a
plane they're going to make more
personal space in the economy section so
you won't be all stuck in there together
and as well as the the requirement of a
mask getting on the plane that is
required by by government all the people
on board all the crew as well will have
PPE provided they can get it of course
all right I wanted to take a little bit
of time to talk about a story that
really touched me a couple weeks ago and
and and I hope you will all enjoy to it
to some extent a Canadian soccer star is
she was facing really one of the most
difficult tests of her life former
national team goalkeeper Karina lip
her husband they welcomed a new baby
into their family her name's Paris she's
healthy she's happy she's very cute but
after she came back from hospital Loblaw
was feeling some shortness of breath and
on examination her doctor said it might
be heart failure and she needed to go to
the hospital she was told as well when
she was at the hospital that she might
have been exposed to kovat 19 so she
went home but she had to be separated
from her brand-new baby and her husband
for a period of 14 days home now but
self quarantined in a room where I'm
separated from Paris and my husband so I
can't hold her touch her put her down
for bed at night which is really
difficult for a mom who's just given
birth and all the connections and
emotions that I'm having and Karina
LeBlanc joins me now Karina thank you
for making the time to talk to us well
both try and get through it I should
tell people it wasn't that video that I
found uplifting it was the next video
you posted when you're 14 days were over
and you finally got to be with with your
daughter you are you're going you went
through something that really a lot of
Canadians are going through when they
have to be separated from the people
they love what what was that like for
you you think you're mentally strong and
I try to use every single mental
strength exercise I've ever learned as
an athlete playing for Canada but it
just nothing really prepares you I don't
know if it was the hormones of giving
birth but you know this wasn't a game
this was life and death and sowing the
fears of like oh my god am i cuz at that
point I wasn't the healthy athlete I was
an at-risk young woman and because I
have heart failure and
so many other things so it was one of
those things where I was terrified and
then just not being able to hold my baby
girl you know just whispered to her
touched her in there so many times I
just wanted to go in the room and just
grab and hold it and say mommy loves you
put her down but that would have been
selfish so it was one of the most
difficult things I've ever been through
but you know what at the end of the day
that that time that we got to reconnect
is one of the most powerful things but I
mean it's scary it's real it when when
the doctors told me I stayed there two
nights in hospital going through the
heart of failure and the toughness of
breathing and then finally getting out
and thinking do I get to hold my
daughter and then them telling me you
know you're gonna have to be away from
her for two weeks
it was so real it was one of those
things where you go through the poor me
but then you do realize quickly so much
of it is how you look at it and the
perspective of it and I think that's
what I took from my name's being an
athlete is that I needed to see the
light at the end of the tunnel but trust
me it was it was extremely hard I cried
myself to sleep many nights but then I
just we FaceTime about 40 times a day
and then we had you know in a place here
we have a little last door where I could
see her so I get to see her through the
glass door and hear her speak and cry
and just hope that she would remember me
after the two weeks which she did and
we're playing that video as you're
talking so people can see that that
reunion which was so intense and and
heartwarming but we were so you were
self isolating in the house you could
hear her crying you could hear her move
around you could hear your husband I
can't imagine how much more difficult it
was because you were you were there and
desperate to look after her yeah
a way or two but I loved being able to
just hear our sounds you know overhear
her waking up crying and it was one of
those things where I felt connected and
I think one of the biggest things being
it and this is my first time being a new
mom is I just always wanted to be
connected to her
so we were able to have her come up to
the door and I would see her and you
know my husband would talk to me and you
would talk to the door which is you know
I mean it was better than nothing but
you know just to see her facial
movements and that's a great thing of
technologies today you get that for face
time too I think my husband was like he
did such a great job he's like he trusts
me righty because our grandparents our
grandparents our parents are supposed to
come down to to the Bahamas but they
weren't able to because obviously Cohen
we didn't want to put them in danger but
it was one of those things where just
hearing her made me feel connected to
her and it was more for me probably
friend for her but the one of the best
things was when we were reconnected and
as you said you showed the video I mean
I I wanted that to be like a moment of
people seeing because so many people
supported me through this journey it was
incredible but I didn't know how I was
gonna react I didn't expect I was gonna
cry the whole time but it was one of
those things did you do you remember me
she kind of smirked and I was like okay
she remembers me and yeah it was
honestly I mean I've played in many big
games for our country and it was the
biggest honor to play for our country
but this was like my greatest honor was
just to be reconnected with my daughter
and husband and just get to holder yeah
I'm trying not to get it boys know it's
an emotional thing I get it um how are
you you didn't end up getting co-ed even
though you had been exposed to it but
what about the heart failure part how
are you doing health-wise what happened
is that my body didn't realize that he
burps so it was still doing different
things as if I was still pregnant
and it wasn't catching up to it and one
of the things was that my body was still
swollen and it's when it's for women to
just know your body and trust your
instincts because it was one of the
reasons that I went to the hospital or I
call the doctors because I was still
swollen and most women are swollen after
pregnancy but knowing my body for my
knees
is an athlete that's like this isn't
right and so I still have to keep my
head pressure down because the
medication I want it's not where they
want it to be which is hard because when
you have hormones as a pregnant woman
you're you're quite emotional and but
through this whole thing which I know
everyone has this story
I hope that everybody has their version
of Paris to see that light at the end of
the tunnel and know it's gonna be okay
and just have something that brings that
penis to them because it was a tough two
weeks or it was 17 days including days
in a hospital but just at the end I had
my happiness and I hope that everyone in
our country can find that moment or that
reason to be fee because this is a
difficult time but you know like I don't
know
fine fine very fine your parents because
that's what makes it that's what allows
us to get through it Karolina thank you
so much for making the time to talk to
me the Prime Minister is coming out so I
will turn to that other other Team
Canada approach we're taking all my best
to your husband and to Paris and I'm
glad you're all doing well and here is
the Prime Minister of Canada our economy
we need to defeat this virus not just
within our borders but wherever it will
be found that's how we'll beat kovat 19
for good so just like we're coordinating
our efforts across the country we're
collaborating with allies around the
globe to earlier this morning
I joined leaders from other countries
and from civil society and industry to
work together on accelerating the global
development of kovat 19 vaccines
treatments and testing we all share a
common goal ending this pandemic and
Canada is stepping up to do its part
Canada's contribution of over 850
million dollars for the global fight
against kovat 19 includes investments in
Canadian and international research at
home we're providing funding for
everything from the University of
Saskatchewan vaccine and infectious
disease organization for
their work on the vaccine development to
vancouver-based absolu ah four
treatments right across the country
we're making sure that Canadians can
keep leading our 850 million dollar
commitment also includes support for
vaccine development through the
Coalition for epidemic preparedness
innovations and the WH OHS solid out
solidarity trial that helps hospitals
share information on treatments the more
we cooperate the more likely that we
find a cure and find it quickly and
that's something we all want to see
defeated abuse from the beginning of
this crisis we have been focused on
what's been happening here we're working
hard to ensure the safety of all
Canadians support our frontline workers
and prepare the recovery of our economy
but kovat 19 is a global challenge that
requires a global solution and everyone
must do their part Canada's contribution
to the global fight against kovat 19
which amounts to more than eight hundred
and fifty million dollars includes
investments in research carried out in
both Canada and around the world it also
includes the development of a vaccine
through the Coalition for epidemic
preparedness innovations and the WH OHS
solidarity trial by working all together
on these issues we are maximizing our
opportunities to find a solution more
quickly and that's what all countries
and all citizens of the world would like
to see is an unprecedented challenge but
it's not the first time the Canadians
have been called to do their part
over the past generations Canadians have
time and time again stepped up in
defense of our shared future this week
marks the 75th anniversary of the
liberation of the Netherlands and a
Victory in Europe day from the fall of
1944 to the spring of 45 thousands of
Canadians pushed back the occupying
forces row
by road town by town they fought and
many died to defend the values that we
hold dear peace and democracy the rule
of law and human rights and today 75
years later we remember their courage
and their sacrifice earlier this morning
I spoke with Mark Rutte a the prime
minister of the Netherlands we talked
about the close lasting bonds of
friendship that exists between our two
countries we talked about how we
collaborated together in years past
standing for our values fighting
side-by-side and how we're doing that
again today in this global crisis in
friendship and in solidarity so today I
ask all Canadians to join me and our
friends and allies in the Netherlands at
2:00 p.m. Eastern time to observe two
minutes of silence in honor of our
veterans as we pause let's reflect on
how each of us can live up to their
example maybe you'll do your part by
staying home to protect our health care
workers maybe you'll bring groceries to
an elderly neighbor or make a donation
to a food bank or simply make the effort
of sending a postcard to a veteran to
thank them for their service with your
actions you are contributing to your
community and demonstrating that
Canadians time and time again will
continue to step up I know the weather
is getting nicer we still need to be
extremely careful and not just for our
seniors but for everyone around us so
don't go out unless you absolutely have
to if you do keep two metres apart from
each other
patient forces one town at a time they
fought and
gave their lives to defend the values
that we hold dear and today 75 years
later we remember their courage and
their sacrifice at 2:00 p.m. Eastern
Time I am asking all Canadians to join
me to observe two minutes of silence in
honor of all our veterans during those
two minutes let us all think of how we
can follow their example perhaps you're
going to do your share by staying home
to protect our health care workers or
making a donation to a food bank or
writing a postcard to to a veteran to
thank them each of us can help our
community but whatever you decide to do
do continue to stay home and keep a
distance of two meters between you and
others thank you thank you for questions
just a reminder one question one
follow-up operator thank you
Elsie first question Kate Baum Garrow
Bloomberg right open hello Prime
Minister we've heard from Canadian
airlines that the government is studying
what is happening elsewhere to help the
sector and they're getting a lot of aid
for in other countries and they are
direct competitors of the Canadian
industry so I'm wondering what exactly
is your government looking at to help
the airline sector beyond the wage
subsidy and why is it taking so long to
roll this out we have in Canada a very
strong airline sector and we we need to
continue to have a strong airline sector
once this is all done so of course we're
looking very carefully at how to support
industries like that that are so
important to Canada and to Canadians but
one of the key things that we were able
to do right off the bat which helped
massively in the airline sector and
elsewhere was move forward on the Serb
and the wage subsidy ensuring that
Canadians can continue to keep their
jobs even as they stay home that they
continue to have that link to their
employers is going to allow our economy
to come back stronger and the damage
done by this kovat 19 pandemic to be
minimized we will have more to say about
sectoral supports
in the future but for now the support
that we've given to workers right across
the country is making a very real
difference you have okay on every name
we know that we had and it's very strong
airline industry before the pandemic and
we will continue to have one afterwards
but during this pandemic it's important
to support two industries and especially
workers and that is why we introduced
the Canada emergency response benefit
and the wage subsidy to ensure that
people can stay home but at the same
time have money to buy groceries or pay
their rent and also to ensure that when
the economy starts up again they will
still have their jobs and they will
still have a job attachment so we will
have more to say about that in the
coming days about how we will
specifically helping certain industries
that have been very hard hit by this
pandemic such as the airline industry
but for the time being the wage subsidy
and the CRB are doing a great job of
helping Canadians right across the
country
nomination you've been committed some
more equality and diversity across
government positions
why did your government decide to follow
the same model by nominating another
english-speaking man to the role instead
of a francophone or a woman we were
fortunate in this country to have many
extraordinary people qualify or
qualified to head up the Bank of Canada
and we made the determination on who
would be the best to see us through this
difficult time and seven years into the
future as well and I know that TIFF
Macklin will do just that
yeah you have your own process to follow
and we had a number of candidates who
were interested in the position and we
made the choice of the best person for
this position during this crisis and in
the next years of our economic recovery
and TIFF Macklin is certainly that
person
thank you merci next question
Laura Osmond The Canadian Press lied
open good morning Prime Minister I
wanted to ask you about the EU pledge
conference this morning the money
pledged by Canada is sort of money
that's already been announced to the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
estimated I'll take about 20 billion
dollars in the long term to roll out a
vaccine worldwide so why is it that
Canada is not bringing more money to the
table and has kind of have been asked to
pledge more in the coming days and weeks
the the pledging conference this morning
was a beginning it was a recognition
that many countries are already stepping
up in developing research and science
towards a global vaccine Canada has made
significant investments as you've
highlighted in our scientists and
researchers who are world class and who
are contributing to finding solutions
not just for Canadians but for the
entire world it is really important that
the world comes together to collaborate
because even once we find a vaccine
whether it's in Canada or elsewhere
around the world we will share that
vaccine in its formula but production of
that vaccine will be extremely important
right around the world as well it cannot
just be the wealthiest countries
producing that vaccine for its citizens
for their citizens we need to ensure
that there are systems in place so that
the billions of people around the world
who are vulnerable can get these
vaccines as well that's why this takes a
global effort and that's why Canada is
so pleased to be able to contribute
through what we're doing here at home
and investments overseas as well and
there will be more to come as the world
grapples with this pandemic this a volca
we know that yes we have some of the
best scientists here in Canada who are
conducting incredible research to
develop a vaccine but there are also
global efforts that are required and we
are in the process of providing historic
funding for this research here in Canada
and also to help in the global fight but
also know that it will require a great
deal of coordination and collaboration
globally and that's why Canada is so
proud to take part to the level of eight
hundred and fifty million dollars in
investments not only for Canada but
globally to show that we are part of
this global approach to finding a
solution because we need that for
everyone thank you and on the emergency
financial benefit will the current
benefit programs be adjusted to account
for the slow and gradual return of
people to work and the fact that it may
return to earning too much income to
qualify for benefits but not enough to
sort of get back to where they were and
make ends meet and pay the bills
Laura I really look forward to facing
that challenge of how we start to scale
back the benefits and help people get
back to work we're not there yet we're
very much still trying to make sure that
people are getting the support they need
even as the economy is starting to
gradually reopen our focus is on keeping
people safe and ensuring that they have
the ability to stay home and pay for
groceries and pay their rents and
support each other so yes obviously a
lot of thought is going into the various
steps that are going to be needed as we
get people out of their homes and back
to work
but for now we're still very much
focused on how we help people through
this thank you next question operator
thank you Elsie person guess y'all okay
Massey yo give you do you intend to
extend that program well I believe there
is a great deal of reflection that has
to go on with respect to the next steps
we know that at some point people will
be returning to work but in what
industry and what region and how are we
going to manage that transition between
the support we're currently providing
people
and what happens when they go back to
work so that's something we have to
think deeply about but for now we're
focused on helping people while the
economy is closed and these issues
regarding reopening and a gradual return
to work will need to be the object of
many discussions with the provinces and
various industries and within government
follow up now in an interview yesterday
you said that in hindsight maybe your
government should have done some things
differently could you tell us exactly
which things you should have done
differently well certainly in an
unprecedented crisis such as this we are
doing the best we possibly could now are
there things we could have done
differently certainly and I know that
after all of this is over there will be
people making recommendations and
checking things and looking at how we
can be better prepared the next time if
there is a next time but for the time
being my priority is what I need to do
today and tomorrow to help Canadians to
protect people and to ensure that we can
get through this properly I don't spend
a lot of time looking in the rearview
mirror I'm looking at what we need to do
now and in the wiki in the coming weeks
thank you merci thank you so Ellen back
to your announcement on Friday about
firearms no there was some vagueness as
to what what happened to people who
still owned illegal firearms now what is
your preference do you what what is the
explanation you can give in terms of
allowing those firearms to remain in
circulation even though they're
prohibited No that's a very good
question now are announced
last week was that we would prohibit the
sale and use and transfer of
assault-style weapons that is a major
step forward in terms of more stringent
gun control in Canada and we're very
happy to be able to do that we promise
that during the election and now we've
delivered now in terms of the next steps
as you say we have to figure out exactly
how this should work how the buyback
program should be established what
specific measures such as grandfathering
should work if we do that so we'll be
looking at a lot of different factors
we'll be talking to the different
parties and we'll also be looking at
what has proved to be effective as a
system and and reasonable and what will
protect citizens best so this will all
be part of discussions we'll have in
Parliament and with the different groups
that are preoccupied by this and we will
find the right answers for Canada yes
but am I to understand because you
talked about the opposition parties am i
understanding that you're not sure that
you will get the support of at least one
party in the house on this buyback
program or is it a question of there
being too many in circulation and this
costing the government too much well I
think there are a lot of factors that
have to be reviewed for me it's not
really a question of cost the safety of
Canadians is my absolute priority and
we'll do whatever is necessary now we
are in a minority Parliament and we must
work with the other parties and I know
that the bloc qubcois and the new
democratic parties have a perspective
that is very close to our own when it
comes to stricter gun control and I'm
quite convinced that we'll be able to
work together and collaborate to find
the best way forward the important
legislation
banning sorry we brought forward
important measures on banning the sale
the purchase and the use of
military-style assault weapons in this
country this is a significant step
towards more gun control in this country
and a very important one but there are
many other steps to take and there are
many other many details to be worked out
on exactly how the buyback program will
works whether and what sort of
grandfathering there might be these are
things that we will be working on as we
move forward towards legislation we will
have to work with other parties in the
house not just because we want to
establish a strong consensus but because
in a minority Parliament it is necessary
to get the support of other other
parties and I know that both of
qubcois and the NDP are very strong
aligned with us in wanting more and
better gun control and we're going to
work together and I'm sure we're going
to be able to get the right balance for
Canadians to keep people safe in their
communities as we move forward
good morning mr. Trudeau the budget is
normally tabled in March and now it's
May is it your intention to introduce a
budget or an economic statement before
John Jews where are you in your
reflection on that and is it absolutely
necessary
well at this point in time we are
investing in helping Canadians through
billions of dollars going out to them
because of this pandemic and at every
briefing and every time the ministers
come together in their in their noon
conferences we talk about what we're
doing and what we're seeing happening in
their coming weeks and what we continue
to focus on and we will continue to be
open and transparent at every step in
terms of a budget normally the budget
presents the projections of what's going
to happen in the coming year
the actions we intend to take as a
government but now we're in a period of
tremendous uncertainty as to what
exactly will happen next week or three
months from now so we will continue to
try and be open and transparent both
with the measures we present and our
projections for the economy and we will
find ways to share that information but
we are not yet able to determine the
best way of going forward whether it
should be an economic statement or a
budget or whether there's another way to
share more information with Canadians as
to what we're seeing in the coming
months we have been extremely
transparent with Canadians about the
investments who are making in this
unprecedented times whether it's the
billions of dollars in support for
Canadian families across the country or
measures that we're moving forward with
to support small businesses we have been
announcing just about every single day
me here or ministers what we are doing
and sharing it with Canadians a budget
typically is an expression of what
people can expect in the coming year
both in terms of how the economy is
going to unfold what sort of measures
are going to be brought in and in normal
times it's usually pretty accurate right
now we're in a situation where there is
a tremendous degree of uncertainty as to
what the economy could look like six
months from now what the economy could
look like three months from now what's
gonna happen in the coming weeks so
while we are continuing to be open and
transparent the reflections on at what
point we might be able to present a
budget or even just an economic update
is ongoing we will continue to keep keep
everyone apprised of what we're doing
and what we see coming and we'll
continue to look for ways to share with
Canadians comparsa Kannamma Crispino in
your mind we're still responding rather
than
acting so do you think it's completely
ruled out the presentation of a budget
between now and June no it's not ruled
out of course we want to be able to give
Canadians confidence that we have a plan
to respond and meet this challenge so
right from the start we have been
reacting responding to the situation we
find ourselves in which is quite
unprecedented and at the same time we're
looking forward towards the economic
recovery and how we can position Canada
to come out of this as best possible the
investments we've made in supporting
small businesses and workers in order to
ensure that people keep their job
attachment even if they stay home all of
these things are not just a response but
they are a preparation for a recovery
that could be very positive for
Canadians but that reflection and that
work continue and we will always be
looking at how we can give Canadians
confidence and share the information
they need I just want to go back to the
question about potential financial aid
for the airline sector Air Canada posted
a first quarter billion dollar loss or
an excess of a billion dollars I just
want you to clarify your answer it
seemed that our bailouts for affected
industries that have been especially
hard hit during this pandemic off the
table is there any possibility outside
of the programs you've already announced
we moved forward very quickly on
supports for workers through the Canada
emergency response benefit and through
the Canada emergency wage subsidy which
is being taken up by companies large and
small across the country including
Airlines who see this as a real way of
making sure that when life starts to
return to normal they are able to get
their employees back to work
very quickly this was the emergency
priority that we had as a government to
ensure that Canadians from Co
to coast-to-coast would be okay to be
able to stay at home to be able to buy
their groceries and support their
families and pay their rents and do the
things that would allow us to stay safe
but we recognize that companies large
and small in various sectors across this
country are particularly hard hit by
covet 19 I think of the airline industry
I think of the tourism sector I think of
the energy sector and another other
significant sectors that will require
more support on that we will be looking
at sectoral supports we will be making
announcements on that in the coming days
or week it is something we have to get
right but we will be looking at measures
to ensure that some of our most
important sectors for the Canadian
economy continue to stay strong through
this this pandemic and mostly beyond it
there are is a great deal of concern
from employees at the Cargill meat
processing plant hi River Alberta that
are going back to work now after the
plant was shut down because of the death
and multiple cases therefore kovat 19
you said last week that the top priority
is ensuring worker safety these workers
don't feel safe what more can the
federal government do in terms of
inspecting food processing plants to
ensure the utmost safety during this
time we're working with provinces across
the country to ensure that the supply
chain for agriculture continues and that
worker safety is upheld though that is a
provincial
area of responsibility but the federal
government has a role to play as well
particularly around ensuring that there
are adequate safeguards and PPEs in
place one will remember that the CFIB
Canadian food inspectors are designed to
inspect the food for safety are ensuring
that the way meat is handled the way
vegetables are processed is not putting
Canadian safety at risk
the responsibility for the protection of
the workers in that place is not the
primary or hasn't been the primary
responsibility of the CFIB
that is much more our four provincial
labor codes but we will of course be
there to support the provinces in its
work to ensure both the continued flow
of supply chains for our for our food
but also the protection of workers who
could be vulnerable right across the
country is a country that is concerned
about the security and safety of its
citizens the federal government has the
responsibility to ensure that any food
prepared for consumption here in Canada
is safe
hadji hygienic and the work of the
federal agency is connected to that but
it is not the direct responsibility of
the federal agency to look after the
safety of workers that falls more within
provincial jurisdiction but of course
the federal government will be there to
help and support and participate as much
as possible in ensuring the protection
of workers in our food industry we will
be there to work with the provinces both
to protect our food supply and the
safety of all workers Prime Minister a
question about the policing the pandemic
report which shows 5.8 million in fines
have been levied against Canadians for
kovat 19 enforcement how do you
reconcile the support the federal
government is providing to Canadians
with the fact that other levels of
government are handing out substantial
amounts of fines I think it's extremely
important that Canadians continue to
behave as we have largely in social
distancing in staying home in keeping
ourselves our loved ones our families
our extended families our seniors our
health care workers and our essential
workers at safe
from rapid spread of kovat 19 the
federal supports that we've given to
workers to families to students to
people right across the country have
been so that people can stay home so
that they can engage in social
distancing so they do prevent further
spread of kovat 19 and we are seeing
over the past weeks the curve is
flattening and we are on a positive
trajectory we are not out of the woods
however and it requires us to continue
to remain attentive and vigilant and
following the instructions set out by
our public health officials and that's
why different jurisdictions have
different more specific rules suitable
for their own jurisdictions and that is
also why they have taken it upon
themselves as a responsibility to ensure
that those rules be followed for the
protection of all Canadians on sending
your kids back to school what specific
protections would you want to see in
place so that kids and teachers are safe
I think obviously that's an area of
provincial jurisdiction that I won't
weigh in this Prime Minister but as a
parent I can certainly say that looking
at what sort of social distancing
measures will be in place what are the
kids going to do at recess where the
kids going to do at lunch how many kids
are going to be in a classroom how my
kids are going to be kept safe are
things that all parents are thinking
about and all parents will want to see
that the school system the province the
teachers are grappling with before we
move forward in the next steps and I
know that there are an awful lot of
people at all those different levels
working on that right now good morning
Prime Minister Olivia Stefanovic CBC
News how do you feel about countries
that aren't contributing to this global
pledge but have in the past and how the
means to do so again I think this is a
moment for people to come together and
recognize that we all have ways of
contributing to solving this problem I
think if it's a it is a global pandemic
and what happens outside our borders no
matter how well we handle what's going
inside our borders will have an impact
on us directly with potential further
spread of kovat 19 or indirectly with
disrupted supply chains and a weakened
global economy upon which we all defend
depend I think we need to look at doing
our part certainly Canada has a long and
storied tradition now stepping up as we
mark the 75th anniversary of Canadians
liberating the Netherlands tomorrow we
know that Canadians have always stepped
up and will continue to step up because
we recognize that our role within the
world does matter and I would encourage
all countries to see that the only way
we're going to get through this is if we
get through this together on another
matter in Canada women have been hit
harder than men bykova 19 and when you
look at many sectors that employ women
such as the service industry they are
suffering what right now so I'm
wondering how can your government ensure
women aren't set back by this virus well
I think a number of people have talked
about the fact that this this is a
economic crisis that has hit our most
vulnerable and most marginalized
people's most women have been extremely
hard hit in the service sector in the
home care sector as well as a number of
marginal and and more challenged
communities whether it be new Canadians
or whether it be young people we need to
make sure and that's why as a government
we've moved forward on protecting
vulnerable people with the Canada
emergency response benefit with extra
help for charitable organizations and
networks that are there to work for each
other one of the things that has been a
real preoccupation for this government
is when we tell people to stay home to
stay safe and their home isn't safe what
do they do the impact of domestic
violence at a time of
tremendous stress and anxiety for all of
us in society that can exacerbate
situations of domestic violence is
something that we are deeply preoccupied
with as a country and as a government
that's why we've made investments in
shelters and in networks to support
women facing fleeing domestic violence
and we will continue to recognize that
this pandemic isn't hitting everyone
equally that the most vulnerable as are
they as they so often are more
vulnerable and that is why we have to do
everything we can to support the people
who need our help including and
especially women through this auction we
recognize that a pandemic such as this
or a crisis does not affect everyone
equally women are extremely vulnerable
because of their jobs often they are the
first jobs to disappear in this type of
situation and they're also facing
domestic violence and we know that
there's a lot of tension and stress in
households because of kovat 19 and what
does someone do when the choice is
staying home to be safe or not because
your home is not safe the reality of
domestic violence is hitting people hard
these days and that's why we are making
investments in shelters in networks that
help women and children fleeing violence
so we will continue to fight
gender-based violence this is a concern
for us and for all Canadians so we will
continue to do whatever we can to help
thank you all right that is the Prime
Minister of Canada giving us daily
update his daily update on what the
government is doing to respond to the
pandemic he'll bring back Vashi
cappellas and David Cochran lots of bits
and pieces there from the Prime
Minister's announcement at but much of
the questioning focused on the reopening
of the economy the step
that need to be taken next vastly I
don't know where you want to go with it
but I'll you start yeah sure I'll jump
off actually where we were where we left
off prior to the Prime Minister's press
conference and that is around the call
from certain opposition a certain
opposition leaders rather I should say
Andrew Shearer at the federal level and
then provincial politicians some
premiers who are voicing concerns over
what they say is the probability or the
possibility rather that the CRB and
various other financial aid measures put
forth by the federal government will in
fact sort of take away the incentive for
people to go back to work and I
interviewed Brian Pallister the premier
of Manitoba last week who said
specifically he'd heard that concern
from a number of business organisations
as his province rosy as you pointed out
earlier is one of the first to open up
in kind of a bigger way than many other
provinces the phases are beginning now
and like you said even patios at half
capacity will be open eventually in
various retail locations and things like
that and he had been hearing from those
business owners that they were concerned
about their ability to rehire people who
were already benefiting from some kind
of financial aid from the government
that question was put to the prime
minister and he was pretty explicit in
saying quote unquote we're not there yet
so the idea of weeding down those
programs or good getting off those
programs he says is not something at
this moment that I guess he is in the
midst of figuring out how to do her he
said attention was being paid to it and
they're talking about it but it's not
time for that right now I think there's
sort of two things to take away from
this the first is you know I haven't I
think it'll be interesting for people to
put forward some evidence that that is
the case first before we can ascertain
whether or not that is a problem I think
I think it's true that there are
concerns from businesses about how
they're going to reopen those concerns
involve rehiring people they were they
involve having the right personal
protective equipment knowing that
there's going to be some sort of
immunity I mean there's a whole host of
concerns for businesses and very valid
concerns about how they're supposed to
open in the coming weeks and the coming
months on the flipside the Prime
Minister was then asked you know okay if
now's not the time are you going to
extend a lot of these programs because
the other part of this is so many of the
financial aid programs that have been
being put forth
for example the subsidies for up to
three months the commercial rent program
which isn't even in effect yet ends on
June 1st like it's for the rent on April
May and June and the CRB is for four
months as well so we're getting to a
point where we're in this odd sort of
space where it's not the the worst part
of everything everything's shut down but
we're also not on the other end of
things we're somewhere in the middle and
that middle ground is gonna last a while
and I think that there are very genuine
questions for the federal government
about what these programs look like
going forward do they stay the same are
they extended is there some sort of
quote unquote weaning off process or a
fettering down of it those questions
have yet to be answered and I think that
they are they are genuine they should be
asked at this point because as provinces
start to reopen these problems become
less of sort of a thought and more of a
reality yeah those are all fairly good
points I also important to remember
though that every province is at a
different space that some said so just
shutting down the CRB right now you know
what would have an impact on places
where you wouldn't want it to so so it's
it's a tough one to figure out for sure
David what not sure what if you want to
jump in there - yeah to build on what
bashy
was talking about there in terms of the
the middle point we are with these
support programs and Andrew Shearer had
an interesting and positive suggestion
earlier when he said you could make
changes to things like the CRB to allow
people to make more than a thousand
dollars a month and have some gradual
reduction in the benefit but still come
out ahead
because right now one of the problems
with is you can make up to a thousand
dollars and qualify for these aid
package if you make a thousand and ten
dollars you lose the two thousand
dollars in the CRB so that becomes a
disincentive to work over a certain
amount and I guess you need to assess
how that then interacts with the wage
subsidy program where you can be rehired
and have the wages subsidized and
whether that's not more beneficial so
it's the it's the push-pull of these
programs that needs to sort of be
resolved as various institutions move
towards reopening in various provincial
jurisdictions but right the prime
minister said he was looking forward to
that moment when you can start the
scaling back yeah I think we all are
looking forward to that moment but
definitely not there yet I mean there's
still larger things that they need to
resolve I mean there is a legitimate
question whether they're gonna head
span the wage selves the extended I mean
or extend CRB because while things might
get better say in New Brunswick where
there are no active reporter cases right
now
Quebec still has a long way to go so
things could vary from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction but also Rosie he said in
days or weeks we will see specific
sectoral packages this is something
people been waiting on for a while the
energy sector the airline sector the
hospitality tourism sector I think
they're waiting to see more data to get
a clearer sense of the full impact of
this before they come up with something
and the focus has been to get the
wide-based
programs out fast to help as many
businesses as many people in this
Universal away as possible though that
hasn't been perfect before they do these
sector specific things so still waiting
on that but also one other point very
important question about the Cargill
meat plan what's happening there
you know we're seeing reports now that
Costco on places like that are limiting
how much meat you can buy because of
interruptions in processing capacity and
what that may do to the the delivery of
food to retail outlets the Cargill plant
in Alberta almost has as many Kovach
cases as Nova Scotia at a single place
it's like oh they're both somewhere
between 900 and a thousand this is going
to be an issue to watch going forward in
terms of how we can ensure as a country
that food processors and food suppliers
are safe well I was gonna say that the
two biggest outbreaks in the country
have been at meat processing plants in
Alberta and and one of the other things
I think the government has to grapple
with is it thinks about this middle
point is you so rightly put it back is
is how do you make sure that people feel
safe enough to return to work because
indeed that's the problem at the Cargill
plant is that the union's saying they
don't feel safe enough to send their
workers back so if you have someone who
wants to come off the CRB and go back to
work but doesn't feel well-equipped then
what is the then what do you do how do
you navigate that you know you want to
make sure that everybody feels safe at
work and that they have the financial
capacity to stay home if they need 30
seconds specially sorry yeah and that's
not an easy problem to solve and
especially on whether or not businesses
feel equipped to reopen and people feel
personally safe to re-enter those
businesses there is a whole other
conversation and set of questions for
the federal government on personal
protective equipment and
actually questions for the for the
provincial government to because it's
almost shared jurisdiction at this point
but a lot we are hearing from a number
of again business owners who are unsure
that they have the equipment they need
to be able to reopen their business and
so again like I said more questions for
the feds on that okay both of you thank
you very much for your special coverage
here today appreciate it we'll talk in
just a moment
but we will leave things here now on CBC
television if you want to continue
watching the federal briefing with
cabinet ministers and public health
officials you can catch that on CBC News
Network and of course streaming wherever
you are on cbc.ca I am Rose Martin here
in the nation's capital we'll see you
back here tomorrow thanks for watching
[Music]
hello again I'm rosemary Barton here in
Ottawa thanks for joining us on CBC news
network streaming right around the world
on our CBC News app and cbc.ca the Prime
Minister reiterated a pledge today of
eight hundred and fifty million dollars
to attempt to boost global efforts
toward developing a vaccine or treatment
for Cova 19 Justin Trudeau made the
promise during an international
videoconference with other world leaders
it's aimed at raising close to 12
billion dollars Canadian for scientific
research in his daily address today
Trudeau says the federal government is
looking also closely at how it can help
the embattled airline sector this
morning Air Canada revealed losses
topping 1 billion dollars in the last
quarter the CEO calls it the darkest
period ever in the history of commercial
aviation the bailout said the bailout
that they are looking for comes
somewhere in the order of 3 billion
dollars the Prime Minister today says
that he will look at sectoral aid in the
days and weeks ahead whether it be the
airline industry or the energy industry
all of this coming though on a day when
many provinces are starting to relax
some of the rules different degrees of
rules of course depending on where you
are some provinces taking a much more
aggressive approach to another than
others will of course take a look at
that national picture across the country
but let's start with the province that
is doing a whole lot on this day and
that is Manitoba Chris Graves is
preparing to reopen his restaurant in
Winnipeg he's the owner of King's Head
pub and he joins us live now Chris good
to see you hey rosemary how are you I'm
good I think I've actually been to your
pub I know where you are in the exchange
district there in Winnipeg yeah there
are some particular rules for how you're
allowed to do this I know lots of people
anxious to get out and socialize a bit
how are you preparing well you know what
when the when this was announced
basically for Manitoba on Wednesday we
had to kind of quickly pivot and first
of all we had to make sure that what we
were gonna do and open up on the patio
was going to be safe we thankfully have
already been able to keep employees
going as well we
we initiated a curbside pickup and
delivery grocery service so we were able
to keep a lot of our staff going so one
of the great things is we already have
been adhering to safety protocols anyway
with you know making sure we had
sanitizer in-house you know face mask
and gloves so you know when this all
came down I mean we were we were a
little bit surprised I'll be honest with
you we did not expect to be part of
phase one but we were also very
cautiously excited because it's been
it's been six weeks for us yeah that's
long so is the restaurant itself allowed
to open or just the patio or have you
reduced space give me a sense of what
it's going to look like yeah so inside
dining is not permitted at this time
were you know expecting that to possibly
be a June 1st if the phase 1 of opening
the patio goes according to plan we're
at basically a 50% capacity right now on
our patio distance has to be no less
than 6 feet apart from each other and
you're half your capacity which is
basically where we are I mean we've been
taking it like one or two steps above I
mean what current regulations are we're
trying to go above and beyond that there
was a regulation that no more than 10
people at a table essentially the max
that we're going to have is no more than
like 5 or 6 to a table at all and you
said that you've been doing this
curbside pickup so you have some
equipment but what about the servers the
people that have to get close to put the
stuff on the table do they have masks
gloves what are you what are you doing
for them to make sure they're safe so
there's another there's another bit of
an issue right I mean a lot of the
regulations that were put out were not
super specific on what had to happen
with in terms of service to a table but
we're going like I said above and beyond
so our servers are going to be wearing
face masks they are going to be wearing
gloves we're also doing things like
one-time use cups so disposable cups
disposable cutlery disposable condiments
one-time use
only we're typically what we have is we
actually have you know condiments on
tables and again something else we're
even taking this one step further and
we're doing a contactless menu so when
people sit down actually as part of
their place setting they have a URL
where they can actually go to look at
our menu so they don't actually have to
physically touch a menu well it sounds
like you've thought of some good ways to
deal with this I'll just end on this
because the the other briefing is about
to start do you do you feel like it's
you you said you were surprised do you
feel like this is happening too quickly
or or do you think you can make it work
what's your assessment
well I'm very confident in in the staff
that we have at the King said but we
would not be doing that if as if it
wasn't for us basically deferring to the
health experts and the province of
Manitoba which I will absolutely say
have done a phenomenal job we're very
very happy with where we are right now
and you can tell by the way the curve is
flattened here yeah okay Chris good of
you to make the time I do wish I also
was allowed to go on a patio but we're
not there yet here so good luck with
everything appreciate it very much
okay thanks rosemary all right that's
Chris graves he's the owner of the
King's Head pub in Winnipeg
let's take you now to back to Ottawa
here the public health officials giving
an update this is the Deputy Prime
Minister Chrystia Freeland just
beginning with introductions about how
this will unfold here we go let's listen
to 2 so I will start with the latest
numbers and go with 19 in Canada there
are now 59 thousand eight hundred and
forty four confirmed cases including
three thousand seven hundred and
sixty-six deaths to date labs across
Canada have tested over nine hundred and
nineteen thousand people for kovat
nineteen with just over a six point five
percent of these testing positive we are
at the start of a new week as as we all
inch closer to social and economic
reopening most of us will be feeling the
full gamut of emotions from excited
anticipation to nervous apprehension all
of these feelings are warranted given
the uncertainties that lay ahead still
there are continued signs that our
effort
have slowed the growth of Cobra 19
overall in Canada in some places the
epidemic has been brought under good
control and the time is right for
cautious reopening other areas the
country may not be quite there yet but
we'll follow guided by the careful
assessment of public health authorities
during these many weeks public health
tools have helped us to tackle covert 19
spread buying it's time to protect and
bolster our healthcare capacity ramped
up research and increased capacity for
testing and tracing going forward
adapting these tools will be a big part
of managing covert 19 for the months
ahead
no matter where we live living with
covert 19 is something we all need to
reconcile with this means physical
distancing hand hygiene and cough
etiquette must continue everywhere and
although we'll be getting out of our
homes more and more it will be vitally
important but at the slightest sign of
symptoms we stay home to save lives
working while sick can no longer be a
thing as we move through the weeks ahead
let's not forget we are all in this
together
and we'll we'll work our way through it
with good science strong evidence
careful steps and a shared goal to
succeed despite the hardships together
we can do hard things today is may the
force so may the force be with us color
force wha are they canoe thank you thank
you dr. Tam dr. new please hey maxy
Burnap remedy thank you as usual I'll
start with the latest numbers on Kovac
19 in Canada there are now 59 thousand
eight hundred and forty four confirmed
cases including three thousand seven
hundred and sixty-six deaths to date
labs across Canada have tested over nine
hundred and nineteen people Fork Ovid 19
with over 6.5 percent of these testing
positive we're at the start of a new
week and as we all enjoy to social and
economic reopening most of us will be
feeling
the full gamut of emotions from excited
anticipation to nervous apprehension all
of these feelings are worn typical given
the uncertainties that lie ahead there
are continued signs that our efforts
have slowed the growth of kovat 19
overall in Canada in some places the
epidemic has been brought under good
control the time is right for a cautious
reopening other areas of the country may
not be quite there yet
guided by careful assessment of public
health authorities during these many
weeks bubble health public health tools
have helped us to tackle kovat 19 spread
- time to protect and bolster our
healthcare capacity research and
increased capacity for testing and -
tracing going forward adapting these
tools will be a big part of managing
kovat 19 for the months ahead no matter
where we are living living with copic 19
is something we will all need to
reconcile this means physical distancing
hand hygiene and call phonetic it must
continue everywhere and although we'll
be getting out more it will be vitally
important that the slightest sign of
symptoms we stay home to save lives
working well sick can no longer be a
thing as we move through the weeks ahead
let's not forget we are all in this
together way through it with good
science strong evidence careful steps
and a shared goal to exceed succeed
rather despite the hardships together we
can do hard
may the 4th be with us
Nancy doc doc no I meant no thank you
dr. new will now go to Jean Yves do
clothes please well thank you Christian
and good afternoon everyone as you know
we're facing a global pendant Mecca that
requires global action when it comes to
action and health that's why Prime
Minister Trudeau made an important
announcement this morning saying that
Canada would continues to play an
important role internationally despite
the issues that we are facing on the
national front
there are some eight hundred million
dollars for testing tracing and
vaccination in order to prepare for the
production and distribution of products
treatments vaccines that will protect us
and help
Kuras over 19 crises at the
international level and that's why we
also reacted as we saw this morning was
a prime minister nationally and
internationally and with the health
crisis has also come in economic crisis
and I would like briefly to summarize a
few of the emergency response statistics
that we have seen over the last a few
days first when it comes to helping
workers through the Canada emergency
response benefit a total of 7.3 million
Canadians have received the serb for a
total of 10 point 6 million applications
second when it comes to providing help
for wage subsidies emergency wage
subsidies as of third the third of May
96 thousand applications have been made
on the part of businesses and a total of
one 1.7 million workers are being helped
through the emergency wage subsidies and
finally to help support our small
businesses in this very difficult time
too
emergency business account 518 thousand
businesses have applied and have
received a positive response following
their applications for the emergency
business account helping them go through
the crisis in order that when the crisis
is over we can still rely on the great
level of leadership and ability of our
small businesses to grow again the
economy Thank You Christa malsu's
Yanni's I own a metal plate Thank You
Jonas we're now ready to take your
questions our Minister of Health and
Heidi is here to answer questions as
well absolutely Thank You Deputy Prime
Minister as usual we'll start on the
phone with three questions before we
turn to the room one question one
follow-up operator Thank You Massie if
you have a question please press star 1
on your telephone keypad we have a
question from Laura Osmond from the
Canadian Press please go ahead to line
and open
good morning ministers for anyone who's
able to answer the Chinese embassies is
the million mass from China that the
public health agency said couldn't be
distributed last week were held up by a
contractual dispute and it's been
resolved are you able to elaborate it on
all at all on what happened and what the
status of those masks is now I am we'll
have to get details back to you I'm
sorry we don't have that technical
information right now Deputy Prime
Minister Freeland I was wondering if I
could ask you more political question
I'm wondering to what extent you're
concerned about the rhetoric coming from
your policy rivals the Conservatives and
their refusal to express their
confidence in the nation's top doctors
well first of all let me be clear about
one thing which is that to ever impune
the loyalty to Canada of a Canadian
based on their racial or ethnic
background or whether they were born in
this country or immigrated here is
completely unacceptable
a Canadian is a Canadian is a Canadian
and I am so confident that the
overwhelming majority of Canadians
understand and believe that when it
comes to the public health officers in
Ottawa and across the country I think
Canada has been very well served by the
dedication and the expertise and the
collaboration of our public health
officers across the country and I think
political leaders across the country
have been really uniform in spending a
lot of time with our public health
officers really working hard to
understand their advice and to listen to
their advice and I think that has served
Canada and Canadians very well Thank You
Deputy Prime Minister operator next
question please thank you the person
just shown idea but the leprechaun idea
the next question is from Lena deep
Canadian Press good morning mr. Duke so
I'd like to go back over the numbers you
just shared with us are very interesting
we talked about 7.3 million Canadians
out of the 10.6 applications for this
herb were there rejections you also
talked about 1.7 million workers who
received the wage subsidy those people
who well in fact what I'm trying to do
is see whether people are being
transferred from one program to the
other could you please give some
additional details on those numbers well
going to the first question with respect
to the emergency benefit 7.3 million
Canadians applied made one or two
applications because the total number of
applications is ten point six and the
applications that came in were were
approved so the difference between the
two numbers is theft
some people have worse
to more than one payment April 11 people
could make put in a new application in
addition to the one that they had made
initially with respect to the wage
subsidy
yes 96 thousand companies applied for
salaries paid between March 15th and
April 11th so that covers 1.7 million
workers so 1.7 million workers have no
need to apply for the serb question so
these aren't people who are transferred
from one to the other I had another
question a more technical one with
respect to the student emergency benefit
now we know that to school calendars are
different in Quebec they were supposed
to be finishing in May it'll be the end
of me so we'll CG up students for
example receive the Bennet for June July
August what about high school students
who are heading off to university will
they be eligible for July in August
because their school year ends at the
end of June well to clarify to to add
some clarity to the first question that
you put it all depends on the workers
circumstances and one situation doesn't
apply to all so some may have received
benefit under the syrup then realized
that the company they're working for
would be playing out emergency subsidies
so then they would be reimbursing or
have already reimbursed the amount they
received because they are now receiving
the wage subsidy now with respect to the
benefit for students what's important
the time when they complete or finish
their studies and when they would have
normally started looking for a job so
for C job for example in Quebec it's
different to Quebec because outside go
back there are no C jep's but once they
finish they're here and they would be
looking for a job that is when they
would become eligible for the emergency
benefit for students with respect to
choose secondary or high school students
who have finished their year and plan to
go on to post-secondary studies outside
of Quebec
it's normally at the end of June that
they would become eligible and - for
university students it is at the start
of May Thank You Minister we'll go to
the operator for the next question thank
you may be seen the next question is
from Lauren Gardner from Politico please
go ahead Deline is not open thanks this
question is for dr. kam you talk a lot
about the need for Canada to ramp up
testing to 60,000 a day and I'm
wondering when you think that Canada can
get that point
and what until then what needs to be
done to get there so yes so I think this
increased testing as you've seen a day
over day so I think the common goal is
to increase that 60,000 is just a the
capacity target for the provinces and
territories based on the existing public
health laboratory capacity but we're
investigating any other Avenue for
increasing lab testing including a point
of care and also the role of serologic
testing when they do come on board I
think it's not a magic number that is a
capacity number you do have to test the
right people at the right place at the
right time according to the epidemiology
of the provinces so they have to adapt
their testing strategy based on what
they're seeing is very different from a
jurisdiction that have no cases and no
community transmission
there's increased testing of course
being ramped up for example in Quebec
particularly in communities where
there's been more reporting of cases so
I know that chief medical officers and
provincial public health authorities are
very seized with the need to use testing
to inform the next stage so I think we
would expect to provide as much support
as we can from the federal level to
enable that to happen so but every day
as I think miss Hardy will attest
we're constantly monitoring every bit of
the supply chain and every day there may
be something that we need to tackle
together so that's just a sort of daily
reality of the supply issue but we're
also tackling supplies from a domestic
manufacturing ramped up as well so I
think a lot of those trajectories means
that we can absolutely be increasing
testing in Canada yeah for the deputy
prime minister I'm wondering kind of
what what is the next stage of Canada's
engagement with the US on the Kovach 19
response it's just given looking at the
large caseload in the US and the
differences between the states on what
some are doing in terms of proving
physical distancing versus moving to
reopen economies and the impact that
could have on Canada as we move further
along and get further away from the
immediate public health response do you
have any thoughts about what might need
to change in terms of Canada's
collaboration or interactions with the
US on bond kovin um so let me just start
by commenting a little bit on the
premise of the question the idea that
there would be a next stage the reality
is that the Canadian relationship with
the United States is so close and there
is a connection and an interdependence
on so many levels that this is a
relationship that we are working on
surely every day even every hour and not
only at the federal level the Premier's
are very engaged particularly in working
with the governors of their border
states mayors are involved business
peoples are involved so it's something
that is happening every single day every
single hour and that is exactly as it
ought to be and it's a relationship when
it comes to coronavirus that has a lot
of different aspects to it there is
obviously the border relationship and I
think that that is working out today
very well for both countries
we have told Canadians we've asked
Canadians to stay at home and it's been
very neighborly to offer that same
approach when it comes to our American
neighbors at the same time essential
Travel is still happening and that is
happening really effectively and that is
so important for things like being sure
that we have groceries in our grocery
stores we also have been working really
effectively when it comes to the medical
equipment supply chain so this is an
ongoing relationship it is something
that is a priority for any Canadian
government very much including this one
and it's going to develop as the
situation with the coronavirus and on
many other issues develops I am nervous
comunist will now turn to the room
starting with julia van dusen from CDC
Julie Van Deusen CBC I think it's for
Teresa Tam or for patty high do so
President Trump says he believes that
Cova 19 is the result of a whole
horrible mistake in China that he and
Mike Pompeo have evidence that it
originated in wuhan lab what's the
government's view where did it where did
it come from how did it start well I'll
start and I'll turn to dr. Tam as she's
been actively involved in monitoring the
illness since first 1st May
disappearance back in December there
will be time obviously and a lot of
interest and importance to understand
how this virus became prevalent and the
human species and I think
those questions are being asked
rightfully so certainly the research and
scientists community is all over it and
trying to understand where the virus
originated from and how its evolved and
mutated since it's been present in
humans but for me as the Minister of
Health and certainly as the Government
of Canada although those questions are
important because they will help us
prevent future outbreaks and understand
what we can learn from this particular
virus what's even more important right
now is to stay focused on Canadians
health and helping Canadians get through
the the outbreak that were in now how we
flatten the curve together and how we
protect and strengthen the health and
social fabric of our communities and so
that's the work that I remain focused on
dr. Tam did you have anything further to
add about your work I don't think we've
seen any specific information to say
that this is a laboratory accident or
release but I at the same time we don't
know the exact origins of this virus of
course
the hypothesis is it comes from a
reservoir like bats it's very likely to
have involved another animal somewhere
in between the zoonotic or animal to
human transmission so that question
hasn't actually been answered fully as
yet so I think there's a lot of work
including genetic analysis and war
collection of animal and other data
there is a international constructs with
Hawaii WH o and and and others just to
try and get to the bottom of the sort of
where that zoonotic transmission occurs
so I think the natural history of the
evolution of this virus will you know
may be found in the upcoming months but
sometimes you actually might not find
that until many months later the SARS
virus was the same thing yet is to trace
back do a lot of sort of analysis in
order to come up with a hypothesis so
I'm not sure that this is something that
will be you know immediately obvious but
work is continuing on that front
okay so I didn't hear the words wet
market so it seems that it's not 100%
clear where it came from and on a
similar kind of vein it wasn't so long
ago and I guess the question is either
for Teresa Tam or petty high do it
wasn't so long ago that the government
said temperature taking was not reliable
there was no reason to take people's
temperatures when they came into the
country that was maybe a couple of
months ago now Air Canada you won't be
able to get on a plane unless you have
your temperature taken you're wearing a
mask so I guess I'm wondering do you
regret being so definitive or is it just
really hard to get your footing when it
comes to this virus well it's a novel
virus undergoes a lot of evolution in
terms of knowledge but the more you
actually understand this virus the more
you begin to know that temperature
taking is not effective at all you know
in terms of people coming across even if
you're infected
we know that the likelihood of picking
up someone who's cinematic is sort of
relatively inefficient and so
temperature screening alone is not gonna
add to that and if we had a significant
number of a cinematic or pre-symptomatic
people that also even reduces even the
effectiveness even more I think the most
important aspect our current response is
ensure that incoming travelers undergo
the mandatory 14-day quarantine so that
within those 14 days if you had the
temperature if you had any other
symptoms you can be safely managed and
that you reduce spread to the rest of
the population so that is really the
fundamental aspect of our border health
response right now thank you doctor mr.
chase hi Steven Chase Globe and Mail my
question is for the deputy prime
minister in 2017 your government
famously said that you would welcome
people from around the world refugees
were fleeing persecution and other
dangers as we reported today 46 Hong
Kong residents
Hong Kong residents who took part many
of whom took part in the massive
demonstrations that began there last
year have now submitted claims for
asylum in Canada they're citing
harassment by police and police
brutality and they're citing fears of
unjust prosecution Canada has a large
and and lengthy history of cantonese
immigration to canada and i wanted to
ask you is there a place for these
protesters in canada well thank you for
your question steve and on specific
asylum claims that's an issue that needs
to be adjudicated very carefully and
very thoughtfully certainly not via
press conference but let me say about
the hong kong canadians that you're
quite right that canada has benefited
hugely from the immigration of people
from hong kong to canada they contribute
tremendously to our society and i think
all of us are very very glad that so
many people from hong kong have chosen
to make their home in their lives here
just to follow a question i think one of
the issues that's going to be debated
more and more over the next few months
and years and I don't think these 46 are
certainly the end of this is does Hong
Kong's political and legal system give
rise to the possibility of cear of a
serious possibility of persecution what
are your thoughts on that look when it
comes to Hong Kong Canada's position is
clear and a very long standing we have
supported consistently the one country
two systems policy I made a number of
statements about that as foreign
minister and Francois Philippe vampire
our foreign minister has continued to be
clear about that
and because of the large number of
Canadians who live in Hong Kong Canada
does have a particular interest in the
situation there Thank You Deputy Prime
Minister Kevin Kevin Gallagher with CTV
News
this is directed at the Deputy Prime
Minister but feel free to answer because
it does have some other implications for
the health minister perhaps dr. Tam
there was a to more cellphone towers in
Quebec that were burnt down there's one
on Friday there's concern that it links
back to a conspiracy theory that the
corona virus is spread through 5g
networks the question though is how has
misinformation that we have seen
throughout this pandemic hindered or
presented a challenge to get out
effective public health information to
to people about this outbreak we'll all
starts and then my colleagues may want
to chip in as well the incident to which
you refer is of course regrettable
and there have been similar incidents in
other countries to of course
misinformation is especially dangerous
at a time like this when all of us are
concerned quite rightly and when all of
us are being asked to radically change
our behaviors and radically change the
way our daily lives operate so it's a
time of both heightened anxiety and
tremendous change and so disinformation
can have a particularly pernicious
effect we as a government are working
very hard to push back against that
disinformation I think that's why all of
us are here right now
and I would like to really also
recognize the very important role the
provinces and public health officials in
the provinces are playing in that effort
and I do also want to say I think
Canadians have been great
Canadians are really smart Canadians are
really well-informed and while
inevitably they're going to be
individual moments where people fall
prey to disinformation by and large I
think as a country people are making
really smart decisions and those smart
decisions those smart well-informed
decisions are saving lives
I don't know patty Teresa do you want to
add anything quickly say that I think
it's quite normal during a period of
such uncertainty and anxiety to look for
answers I think people want to know I
keep saying this the question I hear in
many different guises is when will all
this be over you know how did this
happen and when will all this be over
and I think they're questions that you
know are top of mind for Canadians as
they're stuck at home as their
livelihoods have changed as they're so
many mothers that I know parenting and
trying to work at the same time fathers
to you know the the situation has
changed tremendously for people and that
uncertainty drives I think a quest for
knowledge or a quest for understanding
you know how did we get here and how do
we get out and that's why we've tried so
diligently not just through press
conferences but things like making sure
we have the Canada Copa 19 app that we
disseminate information through the
website that we provide transparent
information that when we don't know we
say we don't know and when we you know
when we have new information we present
it quickly to the public there is a
whole field of communications called
risk communications certainly experts
know that it's really important that you
are available for example that you tell
the truth and that when you don't know
the answer you say you don't know the
answer and so we certainly try to
continue to follow those principles so
that Canadians can have confidence in
our government but also have confidence
in in what we keep saying which is that
we will get through this together as a
country just to follow up and with
provinces opening up businesses or
loosening restrictions there are
concerns that as people start to get
back to what would be more of a regular
routine that some of the new habits that
have been picked up physical distancing
for example may become eroded as time
goes on so what are the main points that
Canadians who are living in provinces
that are starting to loosen restrictions
need to keep in mind to keep themselves
safe and to ensure the the spread of the
virus is as low as possible well I think
the first thing Canadians need to
remember is it's not over
cautious reopening in certain provinces
in certain sectors but that the new
normal will have to include new ways of
living new ways of working that will
protect us in this unique and difficult
time if we as we know as we suspect ice
I would say a large portion of Canadians
haven't been exposed to kovat 19 which
means that we don't have widespread
immunity across the country and we've
done a really good job as Canadians
holding the line flattening the curve
reducing that transmission rate but the
continuation of that depends on us being
extremely careful in these with these
new with these new I guess permissions
from public health that we can proceed
to go back to work in certain settings
that we can proceed to go back to school
in certain settings but that we will
have to follow the advice and guidance
of Public Health nonetheless and I think
for governments what that means is we'll
need to repeat and provide that
information in a variety of different
ways you'll probably see a lot more
Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial advertising about the
importance to continue to wash your
hands and sustain meters apart and to
cover your coughs appropriately and your
cough into your sleeve and and to most
essentially not go to work or go to
school if you're sick and I think those
messages you hear dr. Tam repeat every
day they often are not I think what
people want to hear they want the magic
solution but the magic solution really
is all of us continuing these practices
that we've adopted and become somewhat
used to over the last several months dr.
Tam did you want to add anything yeah
it's gonna be difficult but I think keep
on sustaining our message is about
continuing the the new things that
you've learned I think in the last few
months about personal hygienic practices
definitely staying home we are sick and
the practicing physical distancing but
it I think the public does have to be
supported to do so as well
so for businesses we know that we're the
departments and territories asking for
very specific plans in terms of how do
you re start certain say non-essential
businesses
safely so the customers are also nudged
into doing the right thing like you know
how you paste the number of people in
your store how do you set things up so
that people reduce the risk of
transmission hand hygiene stations you
know in different places as you've seen
I think will continue and needs to
continue and but I think a lot of the
creativity and the innovation that has
actually occurred in the last several
months I think really needs to be
capitalized some of the teleworking
telemedicine and you know being able to
access services in different ways well I
hope continue you need to build on the
momentum of those innovations in order
to help people adjust to this living
with the virus so so we will you'll hear
us in a very boring way repeating those
messages again and again employers of
course need to be able to support and
governments in helping people to stay
home when they're sick that is not an
easy thing to do that's probably the
most difficult habit to sever and but
people have to be able to do it with the
support of their workplace or their
schools or the environment that they are
working on and then of course we know
about the issues that characterize this
epidemic which consists of supporting
those most vulnerable and interests
settings and those must also continue as
well but I think Canadians have so far
been great and that we you know with
with more reinforcement they'll be able
to continue to adjust and adapt and I
think it's just adapting and adjusting
in a very slow way and cautious ways how
public health isn't visit and visiting
things the other thing is the balance of
physical or mental health and all the
other dimensions as well so that there
are some habits that we may have had
which was good for us and we diminished
them I certainly know I've exercised
less but you know so the reuniting some
of those preventive measures I
is very important merci docteur have
another Tonio telephone pitaka
stability' thank you thank you doctor go
to the phone for three questions the
next question is from Jamie DeBell show
you have the floor question with respect
to the production of a vaccine
collection initiative was launched today
and there will be a number of steps
involved some will have access to it
before others even though we want
everyone to have access to it they won't
have to be a priority order
how will we determine who has first
access to the vaccine before I answer
your question about access I think it's
important to underscore the fact because
research is being done everywhere and
here in Canada with research and in a
spirit of sharing data with the view to
developing this vaccine now there are a
number of technical aspects people are
saying that it will take between 12 and
18 months to do so for scientists I
think it's always based on the concept
that the vaccine will be available for
everyone worldwide with respect to to
details on production how it will be
distributed etc those are issues that I
can't answer now
personally but with good cooperation and
collaboration across the world we will
come up with solutions to ensure that
everyone who needs a vaccine once we've
developed a vaccine will have access to
it too thank you
follow-up question yes I will go in
English because maybe Minister I do can
answer about this once a vaccine will be
found by a country or the other or
different countries together there will
be countries who will have means to
produce a certain quantity of vaccines
faster than others so I know that we we
are not there yet but how are we
planning this there will be countries
that will have access to vaccine before
others how will that be determined
you're right in some ways we're not
there yet but in other ways we're
preparing to be there for when a vaccine
is created and how we do that is as dr.
new pointed out we work together with
countries so that the research is fooled
and there's a collective I suppose
shared ownership if you will of the
findings of the research and the
discovery of potential vaccine
candidates but also we're funding a
number of Canadian companies who are
doing research on vaccine like of
seluruh which was part of the
conversation or the announcement today
but looking at others as well as
candidates for people that will not only
be able to find the vaccine but then
produced the vaccine with their partners
across the country and all of that work
is very important it is almost like a
race but a race where you want everyone
to be able to cross the finish line at
once and so we know here in Canada that
as long as kovat is raging out of
control in another country Canadians
will not be safe and that's why the
spirit of collaboration that dr. new
spoke about is so important because yes
of course every country wants to find a
vaccine and vaccinate their citizens but
there will always be risk to every
population if we don't consider the
world health and the global health and
that's why I think it's so
exciting to be part of an international
effort as well as the domestic support
for companies and researchers that are
that are working so hard here in Canada
Thank You Minister operator next
question please
thank you the next question is from
Jessica Murphy from BBC please go ahead
yes hi thank you I'm just wondering what
you can tell me on a federal level
what's being done in terms of emergency
preparedness obviously we're already in
flood season as we saw with Fort Mac but
also you know we're coming up on
wildfire hurricane season so what's
being done amid this pandemic at the
federal level for that preparedness
that's a great question Jessica and it
is something we are very very focused on
every spring the Minister of Public
Safety and emergencies puts together a
plan working with the Minister of
Defense to respond to potential floods
and forest fires this year was no
exception and in fact this year those
preparations have had the added element
of a very deep appreciation that
coronavirus would add a level of
complexity to the response for example
when it comes to being really thoughtful
about places where people who may need
to leave a place where there is flooding
or a place where there is a forest fire
having places where they can go
obviously
this period of physical distancing means
that we have to be particularly
thoughtful about making provision for
those kinds of things but we are you
know we are very aware that flood season
and then forest fire season is upon us
and have been working very hard in
collaboration with the provinces to be
ready yes thank you I do have a quick
follow-up I know in the US for example
FEMA is looking at the complexities for
example of getting people out of
hospitals during this time
and getting people out of long care
long-term care facilities and that kind
of thing I wonder if there's anything
specific that's being looked at in CHEM
in a similar way any of the challenges
or any any things we looked at on at
that level sure of course I mean the
issue of what you do with housing people
who may need to leave areas of flooding
or forest fires is a really really
important one and so of course is the
issue of taking care of and moving
people who are particularly vulnerable
so for sure that's part of the planning
Thank You Deputy Prime Minister operator
next questions is thank you the next
question is from Mary Vestal the walls
apparently devil's question is for Miss
Freeland I'd like to go back a to the
ban on assault weapons that the
government announced on Friday for
months now the government has talked
about those weapons not being used for
hunting so why is there an exemption for
an amnesty period for two years for
indigenous communities or people who are
hunting if you could comment on that
[Music]
thank you for the question announcement
on Friday was an historic moment with
respect to the exception for indigenous
communities it is an issue of
constitutional rights for indigenous
peoples I think that all Canadians
understand that we must pay particular
attention to that including their right
to subsistence hunting
and that is the reason why the exception
was included thank you follow-up
question another question for you miss
Freeland to know to have an update on
the negotiations with the provinces when
it comes to bonuses for essential
workers for a month now they've been
discussing the issue with the provinces
there was a call with the provincial
leaders at the end of last week did you
reach an agreement and if yes can you
tell us when the pay bonus will be paid
by Ottawa to the provinces for essential
workers answer another good question
thank you we have an agreement in
principle between the federal government
and the provinces we understand measures
some provinces have already provided a
bonus to essential workers we're
continuing to work out the details that
doesn't prevent the provinces from going
forward and the federal government is
here to help the provinces we bill that
it is very important for Canadians for
people doing such important work many of
the people doing these jobs are not well
paid and therefore it's very important
to provide the additional support
question so there isn't an agreement
than if I understand what you're saying
answer okay let's pull away from the
federal sleeping here with
and federal public health officials
giving us some more information about
how they're responding to the pandemic
I'll bring in my colleagues fasci
Capella's and daya cochran to talk a
little more about what we heard because
you've tweeted it vastly I'm gonna put
the the numbers we heard a lot of
numbers there from the president of the
Treasury Board today yeah Jean Yves du
Clos laid out sort of as we have been
discussing the need for the financial
aid packages that have been put forward
by the federal government and we should
say also amended as the process went
along by opposition parties but so far
let's start with the CRB that's the
program that you can get $2,000 a month
for up to four months on 7.3 million
Canadians have so far received that the
wage subsidy as of May 3rd Minister
Duclos said 96 thousand applications
made and he calculated and this is the
first time I heard this number but 1.7
million workers are being helped so I
imagine that's for the applications that
would have already been approved my
understanding though is that money
should start to flow to those employers
this week those applications opened up
exactly a week ago today and then the
Canadian emergency business account
which is that $40,000 interest free loan
$10,000 of it is forgivable if you pay
it back by the end of next year five
hundred and eighteen thousand businesses
have applied and being approved so that
is a huge are huge numbers that quantify
for us I think what anecdotally we have
been hearing non-stop since the
beginning of this outbreak about 6 or 7
weeks ago and that is that the need
among Canadians both individuals and
businesses alike is immense and
continues to be but back to our question
that we have been discussing of course
what does that mean for either the
continuation of these programs or the
amendment of them will they change to
better reflect that some provincial
economies are reopening and need to hire
people back or will they be extended to
also reflect the fact that some
provinces are going on that stage right
yet that's right and the wage subsidy
number you're you're quite right so
first time we've really seen a picture
of uptake in the number and and the
government would hope that that number
would go up and that there would be
fewer people using the emergency benefit
and David I think you mentioned to me
earlier this morning there's going to be
some labor numbers out at the end of the
week - yeah labor news coming out at the
end of
weak and sort of there's a consensus
among some economists you could see four
million job losses record it in those
numbers but you know go back to the the
math of what vast you just went through
to provide a little bit more context on
it 7.3 million getting the CRB 1.7
million Canadians getting the wage
subsidy for a total of nine million
people that we know of on these on these
aid programs the Canadian workforce is
20 million people this is 45 percent of
the Canadian workforce that is not now
on some sort of federally created aid
program that is just weeks old so you
can stack on top of that forty five
percent all of the public sector workers
across the country and a gigantic
percentage of the Canadian economy right
now is either completely or largely
reliant on a federal provincial or
municipal government for their income
right now because of the effect that
this pandemic has had on private sector
economic activity I mean it's just in a
the world has gone a world economy has
gone into essentially a coma so forty
five percent of the workforce it's a
staggering number
it is now receiving either the CRB or
the wage subsidy it's just at this point
in time yeah is essentially being you
know kept alive by government aid rather
than the private sector money because
there isn't a very large one thank you
both very much for your coverage
appreciate it you can catch fasci
tonight on her program of course at 5:00
Eastern that's power in politics and
David will catch him wherever he is as
well thank you both very much appreciate
it the other thing that public health
officials were talking a little bit
about today was how we move forward as
some of the economies start to reopen
one of the key messages they had there
from the Health Minister and dr. Tam was
it's critically important to keep up the
public health measures that have been in
place and that if you are sick to stay
home that you shouldn't go back to work
if you're sick in those cases the new
line the new way of thinking about this
from dr. Tam seems to be that we have to
have find a way to live with Kovac 19
until there's treatment or vaccine I'm
rosemary Barton our coverage continues
after this short break with Andrew
Nichols I will see you back here
tomorrow thank you for watching stay
safe
[Music]